This idea came to me while watching Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. The opening scene shows a group of kids driving in car and engaging in race with a the lead care of a military convoy (driven by a young man). The background track is “Hound Dog” by Elvis Presley. Not your ordinary Hound Dog, its a very high quality, remaster version of the song. After the movie I tried to find the song, but every version I played was not the crystal clear quality version that seemed to come from my television. Now whether that is true or completely in my head is irrelevant. Just the idea got me thinking: the IP of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, is the film itself. The “remastered song" doesn’t constitute any real intellectual property gain. Due to complexity of musical rights and for the purpose of this example let’s assume that the Lucasfilm purchased entirely the rights to the song so they completely owned it. If Lucasfilm then chooses to “open source” the remastered song for the benefit of society, its effectiveness to compete should not be at all materially diminished. Wouldn’t everyone love to have a crisp, clean copy of arguably one of the greatest songs of the 20th century?

I am no open source fanatic either. I believe that intellectual property is valuable and that the costs a firm incurs to develop products, software, hardware, processes or otherwise do have value. I am proposing for companies to segregate that IP which truly represents protected property giving a competitive advantage and that IP which is a necessary cost of doing business and represents no material future gain. Case in point, the remastered Hound Dog track on Indiana Jones 4. Lucasfilm needed to remaster the song because let’s face it, a grainy, gritty version wouldn’t posses the same oomph that the scene and (in large part) the background track delivered on opening scene. Now, a music track with its complex ownership and royalty structure is not the best example. Even the fact that the song wasn’t an original for the movie makes it a bad example because presumably the track was earning an existing royalty so either Lucasfilm would have to purchase the rights, spend money to remaster it, and then give it away for free, or not buy it, spend the money to remaster it, and then prohibited from releasing it for free because they don’t actually own the rights. Let’s look at some other possible applications of this open source model. We can start with software because it’s easy.

### Open Source Software
Most people have heard of, if not just the term, open source software. A LOT of the world’s technology is built on it. The software community gets this better than anyone else, because as a community we understand that writing the code to style a login box on a webpage is not economical. So some companies will see a profit opportunity and build a styling library for input boxes, charging any developers who want to use it. But then comes along a person or company who doesn’t want to pay the price for the library in order to use it on their fancy new website and decide to write their own. When it’s done they sit back and admire their work for the whole project and they think “you know, that styling library is pretty cool, but it really has nothing to do with my website so I’ll just let other people use it for free.” The real power of open source software is that the other users of the code may in turn add to or improve that library. Now the library grows and has more and more users because it provides more and more flexibility. This is the open source product lifecycle. But many firms are very private or protective of their IP and products. So while they are happily consumers of open source software (because, why not, it saves money if nothing else) they are reluctant contributors to open source… and even more reluctant liberators of their non essential projects into open source. I proposed an assertion library ======HERE====== to provide easy value checking functionality in our development projects. I got tired of writing redundant code to check if a date was valid or a number was greater than zero etc. So I decided we should create a library to do it. This library in no way represents a competitive advantage, proprietary business knowledge or anything that could constitute material intellectual value. In fact, I am in a unique position to make this call, because as the creator I am willing to give it away for free. Even if I thought there was a low. but actual value associated with it, giving it for free as an open source project would come down to an economical trade off. Thus, this is a perfect candidate for a firm to open source in the effort to advance “collective development” and help other firms focus on their proprietary software as well.
If we look at another example that is a little closer to intellectual property I believe the case can still be made for the greater good over protectionism. I recently began working on a library to interface with a vendors FIX engine (FIX stands for Financial Information eXchange) and is basically a protocol used by the majority of the worlds financial systems to communicate buy and sell orders to brokers, trading venues, and other parties. So you can see this software is a bit more specialized. To be sure, it does contain more business oriented knowledge than the example above which is more or less code to make better code. But even here I believe there is a meaningful value trade in open sourcing our code for FIX connectivity. Because the reality is that we still haven’t written the truly protected and coveted “secret sauce”. That might be our order management system itself, or a high speed algorithmic trading engine. But the code to send the order? Receive back an acknowledgment? This is code that any reasonable developer could sit down with the API documents and write. In fact, thats my test when it comes to software development… is this something that a group of people working at different firms would write effectively the same? If so, its a good candidate. If not, its truly proprietary. If you gave 5 different developers the task of writing a high speed algorithm for trading futures, you’d probably get 6 different versions. But that’s highly unlikely for the FIX connector. To the extent that code is different, we could likely learn from each other and produce a better library. For instance, maybe one of the firms never trades bonds, so they don’t write the code needed to handle bond orders. Yet another firm never trades an international stock, so they don’t bother to write that. Then one day comes along where the trading desks of each firm needs to step out of their normal isolated box and trade that new type of security. Each development team in turn needs to scramble to replicate the functionality that the other firm has already build, tested, and been using in a production environment. And that’s the point. The specialized economy model exists for a reason. I don’t mow my own grass because the opportunity cost is to high. I’d much rather pay $20 to have a company do it, because it’s way cheaper than my time (assuming I don’t take pleasure in cutting grass and I am just valuing my time on a purely economical basis).


### Design
Let’s step out of software for a minute and into something a bit related, but less heavy than the idea of sending trading orders to the floor of an exchange. Let’s say I’m throwing a concert and I want a very attention grabbing flyer for it. I sit at my computer and look at all the fonts and none of them seem to really match up with what I have in my head. I can see it clearly, could describe it someone, but just can’t find one that delivers the punch I want my brochure to have. So I decide to contract a graphic designer to design me a font for the concert. We sit down, I describe everything and they designer creates my font. It’s perfect. It’s exactly what I wanted. I create the flyer and the concert goes great. So what about this font? My contract with the designer says I own it and can do whatever I want with it. Why not give it away for free as open source? I’m not a graphic design house or a font foundry. I am a musician or concert promoter or whatever. At this point it’s already a sunk cost, it has no future value to me, but could easily be of value to someone else. Of course, the counter argument here is well maybe the font is so valuable that people would be willing to pay for it and it would be so lucrative that you’d quit the concert promoting business and sell your font full time. I mean, sure, I guess, but it’s pretty far fetched.